add produce/consumer best practices page (#8242)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/best-practices/how-we-mesh/mesh-6-coordinate-versions.md

This guide goes over the following topics:
- [How producers introduce new model versions safely](#best-practices-for-producers)
- [How consumers evaluate and migrate to those new versions](#best-practices-for-consumers)

For how versioning works at a technical level (YAML structure, contracts, aliasing), see [model versions](/docs/mesh/govern/model-versions).

## Best practices for producers

Producers own the creation, rollout, communication, and deprecation of model versions. The following steps go over what producers should do when introducing a new version of a model.

<!-- no toc -->
  - [Step 1: Decide when a changes needs a new version](#step-1-decide-when-a-changes-needs-a-new-version)
  - [Step 2: Create the new version safely](#step-2-create-the-new-version-safely)
  - [Step 3: Add a deprecation date](#step-3-add-a-deprecation-date)
  - [Step 4: Communicate the new version](#step-4-communicate-the-new-version)
  - [Step 5: Remove the old version](#step-5-remove-the-old-version)
  - [Step 6: Clean up deprecated versions](#step-6-clean-up-deprecated-versions)

> #### Step 1: Decide when a changes needs a new version

Reviewer: I think this should be "change" instead of "changes"

Author: oof good catch!

When creating an original version of a model, use [model contracts](/docs/mesh/govern/model-contracts) to ensure that breaking changes produce errors during development. The model contract ensures you, as a producer, are not changing the shape or data type of the output model. If a change breaks the contract, like removing or changing a column type, this means you should create a new model contract, and thus a new model version.

Here are some examples of breaking changes that might need a new version:
- Removing a column
- Renaming a column
- Changing a column type

> Here's an example of a non-breaking change:

Reviewer: Perhaps this should be: "Here are some  examples.." since a few are listed?

1. Repoint the `fishtown_analytics` alias to your latest version file (for example,`fishtown_analytics_v2`), or create a view on top of the latest model version
2. Use the `enabled` [config option](/reference/resource-configs/enabled) to disable the deprecated model version so that it doesn’t run in dbt jobs and can’t be referenced in a cross-project ref
3. Drop or delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1` object from your warehouse with a manual script or appropriate process

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

... and that's it! You should now have a new version of the model and a deprecated version. The next section is meant for consumers to evaluate and migrate to the new version.

## Best practices for consumers
Consumers rely on upstream models and need to make sure that version transitions don’t introduce unintended breakages.

1. Begin writing a cross-project ref to use a public model from a different project. In this case, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics') }}`.

> 2. Once you see deprecation warnings, test the latest version of a model by explicitly referencing it in your ref. For example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics', v='2') }}`. Check if it's a breaking change for you or has any unintended impacts on your project. 

Reviewer: I believe this should be `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics', v=2) }}` (no quotes around the version number). although not sure if the quoted version would cause a break or not!

Author: oh ok, i was going by [this](https://arc.net/l/quote/gjnenkbj) but can change it back!

  - [Step 5: Remove the old version](#step-5-remove-the-old-version)
  - [Step 6: Clean up deprecated versions](#step-6-clean-up-deprecated-versions)

#### Step 1: Decide when a change needs a new version

When creating an original version of a model, use [model contracts](/docs/mesh/govern/model-contracts) to ensure that breaking changes produce errors during development. The model contract ensures you, as a producer, are not changing the shape or data type of the output model. If a change breaks the contract, like removing or changing a column type, this means you should create a new model contract, and thus a new model version.

Here are some examples of breaking changes that might need a new version:
- Removing a column
- Renaming a column
- Changing a column type

Here are some examples of non-breaking changes:
- Adding a new column
- Fixing a bug in an existing column

Here are examples of changes that might be breaking depending on your business logic:
- Changing logic behind a metric
- Changing granularity
- Modifying filters
- Rewriting `CASE` statements

#### Step 2: Create the new version safely

> After deciding that a change needs a new [version](/reference/resource-properties/versions), you can create the new version safely. Let's say you're removing a column:

Reviewer 2: "safely" seems a bit vague here. Suggesting the following revision:

```suggestion
After deciding that a change needs a new [version](/reference/resource-properties/versions), follow these steps to create the new version without disrupting existing workflows. Let's say you're removing a column:
```

1. Create a new version of the model file. For example, `fishtown_analytics_v2.sql`. Each version of a model must have its own SQL file.
2. Keep the default version stable. In the model's `properties.yml` file:
   - Set [`versions`](/reference/resource-properties/versions) to include the old version and the new version: `- v: 1` and `- v: 2` respectively.
   - Set the [`latest_version:`](/reference/resource-properties/latest_version) to `latest_version: 1`.

    This ensures that downstream consumers using `ref(...)` won’t accidentally start using v2. Without setting this, the default will be the highest numerical version, which could be a breaking change for consumers.

3. Set an [alias](/reference/resource-configs/alias) or create a view over the latest model version. By aliasing or creating a view over the latest model version, you ensure `fishtown_analytics` (without the version suffix) always exists as an object in the warehouse, pointing to the latest version. This also protects external tools and BI dashboards.

#### Step 3: Add a deprecation date

> 1. In the model's `properties.yml` file, set a [`deprecation_date`](/reference/resource-properties/deprecation_date) to the model's old version. The `deprecation_date` is a date in the future that signifies when the old version will be removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In the model's `properties.yml` file, set a [`deprecation_date`](/reference/resource-properties/deprecation_date) for the model's old version. The `deprecation_date` is a date in the future that signifies when the old version will be removed.
```

>    This notifies downstream consumers and will appear in the dbt run logs as a warning that the old version is nearing deprecation and consumers will need to [migrate](#best-practices-for-consumers) to the new version. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This notifies downstream consumers and will appear in the `dbt run` logs as a warning that the old version is nearing deprecation and consumers will need to [migrate](#best-practices-for-consumers) to the new version. 
```

   
    <File name='models/properties.yml'>
    ```yaml
    models:
      - name: fishtown_analytics
        latest_version: 1
        columns:
          - name: column_to_remove
          - name: column_to_keep

        versions:
          - v: 1                 # old version — uses all top-level columns
            deprecation_date: "2025-12-31"
          - v: 2                 # new version
            columns:
              - include: all
                exclude: [column_to_remove]   # <— specify which columns were removed in v2
    ```
    </File>
2. Merge the new version into the main branch.
3. Run the job to build the new version.
4. Verify that the new version builds successfully.

> 5. Verify that the deprecation date is set correctly in the dbt run logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Verify that the deprecation date is set correctly in the `dbt run` logs.
```

> If a user tries to ref models (like `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'model_name', v=1) }}`) using the `v=1` argument after the deprecation date, the ref call will error once the producer project removes the `v1` version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a you try to reference models (for example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'model_name', v=1) }}`) using the `v=1` argument after the deprecation date, the `ref` call will fail once the producer project removes the `v1` version.
```

#### Step 4: Communicate the new version

> Once you've made the change, communicate the new version to downstream consumers. Let them know that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After creating a new version and setting a deprecation date for the old version, communicate the new version to downstream consumers. Let them know that:
```

- A new version is available and a deprecation timeline exists.

> - They can test the new version and [migrate](#best-practices-for-consumers) over. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Consumers can test the new version and [migrate](#best-practices-for-consumers) over. 
```

> - To test the new version, they can use `v='2'` when `ref`ing' the model: `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'model_name', v=2) }}`.

Reviewer 2: `ref`ing' might not be a commonly used term, can we use this instead:
```suggestion
- To test the new version, consumers can use `v=2` when referencing the model. For example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'model_name', v=2) }}`.
```

#### Step 5: Remove the old version
Once the consumers confirm they've tested and migrated over to the new version, you can set the new version as the latest version:

<File name='models/properties.yml'>

```yaml
models:
  - name: fishtown_analytics
    latest_version: 2 # update from 1 to 2 to set the new version as the latest version
    versions:
      - v: 1 # this represents the old version
      - v: 2 # this represents the new version
```
</File>

> This then updates the default ref to the new version. For example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics') }}` will now resolve to the `fishtown_analytics_v2` model in the `upstream_project`. If consumers want to use the old version, they can use `v='1'` when `ref`ing' the model: `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics', v=1) }}`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This then updates the default `ref` to the new version. For example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics') }}` will now resolve to the `fishtown_analytics_v2` model in the `upstream_project`. If consumers want to use the old version, they can use `v=1` when referencing the model: `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics', v=1) }}`.
```

#### Step 6: Clean up deprecated versions

> Once all consumers have [migrated](#best-practices-for-consumers) to the new version, you can clean up the deprecated version. You could chose to "hard delete" all old versions, or "soft delete" them for continuity. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After all consumers have [migrated](#best-practices-for-consumers) to the new version, you can clean up the deprecated version. You could choose to "hard delete" all old versions, or "soft delete" them for continuity. 
```

Author: great catch!

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="hard-delete" label="Hard delete (cleanest)">

> "Hard delete" old versions is the cleanest approach and removes all old version artifacts from your project:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"Hard deleting" old versions is the cleanest approach and removes all old version artifacts from your project:
```

> 1. Delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1.sql` file and rename the new version back to `fishtown_analytics.sql`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1.sql` file and rename the new version back to `fishtown_analytics.sql`.
```

> 2. Delete all version specifications from your `.yml` file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Delete all version specifications from your `.yml` file.
```

> 3. Drop or delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1` object from your warehouse with a manual script or appropriate process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Drop or delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1` object from your warehouse with a manual script or using a cleanup macro.
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="soft-delete" label="Soft delete (retains continuity)">

> Soft delete old versions retains all old version to avoid confusion if more model versions get introduced in future, and for continuity. Bear in mind that your version control platform will also have the history of all of these changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Soft deleting old versions retains all old version artifacts to avoid confusion if more model versions get introduced in future, and for continuity. Bear in mind that your version control platform will also have the history of all of these changes.
```

> 1. Repoint the `fishtown_analytics` alias to your latest version file (for example,`fishtown_analytics_v2`), or create a view on top of the latest model version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Repoint the `fishtown_analytics` alias to your latest version file (for example,`fishtown_analytics_v2`), or create a view on top of the latest model version.
```

> 2. Use the `enabled` [config option](/reference/resource-configs/enabled) to disable the deprecated model version so that it doesn’t run in dbt jobs and can’t be referenced in a cross-project ref

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Use the `enabled` [config option](/reference/resource-configs/enabled) to disable the deprecated model version so that it doesn’t run in dbt jobs and can’t be referenced in a cross-project ref.
```
Can we also add an example on how to use `enabled`?

> 3. Drop or delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1` object from your warehouse with a manual script or appropriate process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Drop or delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1` object from your warehouse with a manual script or appropriate process or using a cleanup macro.
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

... and that's it! You should now have a new version of the model and a deprecated version. The next section is meant for consumers to evaluate and migrate to the new version.

## Best practices for consumers

> Consumers rely on upstream models and need to make sure that version transitions don’t introduce unintended breakages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consumers rely on upstream models and need to make sure that version transitions don’t introduce unintended breakages. Refer to the following steps to migrate to the new version:
```

> 1. Begin writing a cross-project ref to use a public model from a different project. In this case, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics') }}`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Begin writing a cross-project reference to use a public model from a different project. In this case, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics') }}`.
```

> 2. Once you see deprecation warnings, test the latest version of a model by explicitly referencing it in your ref. For example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics', v=2) }}`. Check if it's a breaking change for you or has any unintended impacts on your project. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Once you see deprecation warnings, test the latest version of a model by explicitly referencing it in your `ref`. For example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics', v=2) }}`. Check if it's a breaking change for you or has any unintended impacts on your project. 
```

   - If it does, consider explicitly “pinning” to the current, working version of the model before the new version becomes the default: `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics', v=1) }}`. Bear in mind that you will need to migrate at some point before the deprecation date.

> 3. At some point before the deprecation date, you can migrate to the new version of the model by removing the version specification in your cross-project reference:  `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics')` and make any downstream logic changes needed to accommodate this new version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Before the deprecation date, you can migrate to the new version of the model by removing the version specification in your cross-project reference:  `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics')`. Make any downstream logic changes needed to accommodate this new version.
```

   
   This notifies downstream consumers and will appear in the `dbt run` logs as a warning that the old version is nearing deprecation and consumers will need to [migrate](#best-practices-for-consumers) to the new version. 
   
    <File name='models/properties.yml'>
    ```yaml
    models:
      - name: fishtown_analytics
        latest_version: 1
        columns:
          - name: column_to_remove
          - name: column_to_keep

        versions:
          - v: 1                 # old version — uses all top-level columns
            deprecation_date: "2025-12-31"
          - v: 2                 # new version
            columns:
              - include: all
                exclude: [column_to_remove]   # <— specify which columns were removed in v2
    ```
    </File>
2. Merge the new version into the main branch.
3. Run the job to build the new version.
4. Verify that the new version builds successfully.
5. Verify that the deprecation date is set correctly in the `dbt run` logs.

> If a you try to reference models (for example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'model_name', v=1) }}`) using the `v=1` argument after the deprecation date, the `ref` call will fail once the producer project removes the `v1` version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you try to reference models (for example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'model_name', v=1) }}`) using the `v=1` argument after the deprecation date, the `ref` call will fail once the producer project removes the `v1` version.
```

```
</File>

This then updates the default `ref` to the new version. For example, `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics') }}` will now resolve to the `fishtown_analytics_v2` model in the `upstream_project`. If consumers want to use the old version, they can use `v=1` when referencing the model: `{{ ref('upstream_project', 'fishtown_analytics', v=1) }}`.

#### Step 6: Clean up deprecated versions

After all consumers have [migrated](#best-practices-for-consumers) to the new version, you can clean up the deprecated version. You could choose to "hard delete" all old versions, or "soft delete" them for continuity. 

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="hard-delete" label="Hard delete (cleanest)">

"Hard deleting" old versions is the cleanest approach and removes all old version artifacts from your project:
1. Delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1.sql` file and rename the new version back to `fishtown_analytics.sql`.
2. Delete all version specifications from your `.yml` file.
3. Drop or delete the `fishtown_analytics_v1` object from your warehouse with a manual script or using a cleanup macro.

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="soft-delete" label="Soft delete (retains continuity)">

> Soft deleting old versions retains all old version artifacts to avoid confusion if more model versions get introduced in future, and for continuity. Bear in mind that your version control platform will also have the history of all of these changes.

Reviewer 2: For consistency:
```suggestion
"Soft deleting" old versions retains all old version artifacts to avoid confusion if more model versions get introduced in future, and for continuity. Bear in mind that your version control platform will also have the history of all of these changes.
```

1. Repoint the `fishtown_analytics` alias to your latest version file (for example,`fishtown_analytics_v2`), or create a view on top of the latest model version.
2. Use the `enabled` [config option](/reference/resource-configs/enabled) to disable the deprecated model version so that it doesn’t run in dbt jobs and can’t be referenced in a cross-project ref. For example:
       <File name='models/properties.yml'>
    ```yaml
    models:
      - name: fishtown_analytics
        latest_version: 1
        columns:
          - name: column_to_remove
          - name: column_to_keep

        versions:
          - v: 1                 # old version — uses all top-level columns
            deprecation_date: "2025-12-31"
            config:

>               enabled: false  # <— disable the old version# disable deprecated version so it no longer runs

Reviewer 2: There are two descriptions here, should we keep both or just `# disable deprecated version so it no longer runs`?

>               enabled: false  # <— disable the old version# disable deprecated version so it no longer runs

Author: ```suggestion
              enabled: false  #  disable deprecated version so it no longer runs
```
